aborio -> rice
adzuki -> bean
agnolotti -> pasta
aji -> pepper
albacore -> tuna
ale -> alcohol
almond -> nut
alouette -> cheese
amaretto -> alcohol
amarillo -> alcohol
amaro -> alcohol
amarula -> alcohol
amberjack -> alcohol
american -> cheese
amontillado -> alcohol
anaheim -> pepper
ancho -> pepper
anchos -> pepper
andouille -> meat
aperitif -> alcohol
aperol -> alcohol
apricot -> fruit
arborio -> rice
armagnac -> alcohol
arrack -> alcohol
asadero -> cheese
asiago -> cheese
asti -> alcohol
atta -> flour
bacardi -> alcohol
backstrap -> meat
baguettes -> bread
baileys -> alcohol
barolo -> alcohol
bartlett -> fruit
basa -> fish
basmati -> rice
bass -> fish
beaujolais -> alcohol
beer -> alcohol
benedictine -> alcohol
besan -> flour
bibb -> lettuce
bihon -> pasta
bing -> cherry
biscuit -> bread
blue -> cheese
bluefish -> fish
bocconcini -> cheese
bock -> alcohol
bolillos -> bolillo
bonito -> fish
bosc -> fruit
bourbon -> alcohol
boursin -> cheese
bowtie -> pasta
braeburn -> apple
brandy -> alcohol
branzino -> fish
bratwurst -> meat
brie -> cheese
brioche -> bread
brisket -> meat
brut -> alcohol
bucatini -> pasta
bun -> bread
bunashimeji -> mushroom
bunny -> rabbit
burgundy -> alcohol
burrata -> cheese
buttermilk -> milk
butternut -> squash
butternut -> vegetable
cabernet -> alcohol
cachaca -> alcohol
calasparra -> rice
calimyrna -> fruit
calrose -> rice
calvados -> alcohol
cambozola -> cheese
camembert -> cheese
campanelle -> pasta
campari -> alcohol
cannelini -> beans
cannellini -> bean
cannelloni -> pasta
capellini -> pasta
caprino -> cheese
carnaroli -> rice
cashew -> nut
catfish -> fish
cavatelli -> pasta
cellentani -> pasta
chablis -> alcohol
challah -> bread
chambord -> alcohol
chamisul -> alcohol
chanterelle -> mushroom
chanterelles -> mushroom
char -> fish
chartreuse -> alcohol
chasselas -> grape
cheddar -> cheese
chedder -> cheese
chestnuts -> nut
chevre -> cheese
chianti -> alcohol
chilaca -> pepper
chile -> pepper
chipotle -> pepper
choux -> bread
chowmein -> pasta
chub -> fish
ciabatta -> bread
cider -> alcohol
cinzano -> alcohol
cipollini -> onion
citronella -> oil
clamshell -> mushroom
cobia -> fish
cod -> fish
cointreau -> alcohol
colby -> cheese
colbyjack -> cheese
coleslaw -> slaw
comte -> cheese
comtÃ© -> cheese
concha -> bread
conchiglie -> pasta
concord -> fruit
cooleeney -> cheese
corbina -> fish
cornbread -> bread
cornish -> poultry
corona -> alcohol
cotija -> cheese
cottage -> cheese
coulotte -> meat
crappie -> fish
crimini -> mushroom
crisphead -> lettuce
croissant -> bread
cubanelle -> pepper
curacao -> alcohol
cuvee -> alcohol
d'anjou -> fruit
daiquiri -> alcohol
dairy -> milk
delicata -> vegetable
dende -> oil
disaronno -> alcohol
ditalini -> pasta
drambuie -> alcohol
eggnoodle -> noodle
elbow -> pasta
emmentaler -> cheese
enoki -> mushroom
eryngii -> mushroom
espelette -> pepper
farfalle -> pasta
fava -> bean
fernet -> alcohol
feta -> cheese
fettuccine -> pasta
fideo -> pasta
flatbread -> bread
flounder -> fish
fontina -> cheese
formaggio -> cheese
fraiche -> cream
frangelico -> alcohol
fuggles -> hops
fuji -> apple
fusilli -> pasta
fuyu -> fruit
gala -> apple
galliano -> alcohol
gammon -> meat
garbanzo -> bean
garganelli -> pasta
gemelli -> pasta
gewurztraminer -> alcohol
gin -> alcohol
gnocchetti -> pasta
gorgonzola -> cheese
gouda -> cheese
grana -> cheese
grappa -> alcohol
gravenstein -> apple
grigio -> alcohol
grouper -> fish
grouse -> poultry
gruyere -> cheese
guajillo -> pepper
gueuze -> alcohol
habanero -> pepper
haddock -> fish
halloumi -> cheese
hamachi -> fish
hamburger -> meat
harina -> flour
havarti -> cheese
hazelnuts -> nut
hen -> poultry
honeycrisp -> apple
huitlacoche -> mushroom
jack -> cheese
jagermeister -> alcohol
jam -> preserves
jarlsberg -> cheese
jasmati -> rice
jasmine -> rice
jelly -> preserves
jonagold -> apple
kahlua -> alcohol
kasseri -> cheese
kefalotiri -> cheese
kefalotyri -> cheese
kidney -> bean
kirsch -> alcohol
kirschwasser -> alcohol
ladyfingers -> bread
lager -> alcohol
lamb -> meat
lambrusco -> grape
lasagne -> pasta
leicester -> cheese
lillet -> alcohol
ling -> fish
lingcod -> fish
linguine -> pasta
liqueur -> alcohol
lumaconi -> pasta
macadamia -> nut
macaroni -> pasta
macintosh -> apple
mackerel -> fish
madeira -> alcohol
mahi -> fish
mahon -> cheese
maitake -> mushroom
malbec -> alcohol
manchego -> cheese
manuka -> honey
manzanilla -> alcohol
marasca -> cherry
maraschino -> fruit
marcona -> nut
margarita -> alcohol
marischino -> cherry
marlin -> fish
marmalade -> preserves
marnier -> alcohol
marschino -> alcohol
mascarpone -> cheese
mayo -> mayonnaise
mcintosh -> apple
medjool -> fruit
midori -> alcohol
mignon -> meat
milkfish -> fish
misua -> pasta
mizithra -> cheese
monkfish -> fish
monterey -> cheese
montmorency -> cherry
morel -> mushroom
moscato -> alcohol
moscato -> cheese
mostaccioli -> pasta
mozzarella -> cheese
mulato -> pepper
mung -> bean
naan -> bread
nacho -> cheese
nameko -> mushroom
neufchatel -> cheese
noodles -> pasta
oleo -> butter
oloroso -> alcohol
onglet -> meat
orecchiette -> pasta
orzo -> pasta
oscar -> fish
ouzo -> alcohol
padron -> pepper
paleale -> alcohol
pancetta -> meat
panettone -> bread
panfish -> fish
panna -> cream
panquehue -> cheese
pappardelle -> pasta
pardano -> cheese
parmesan -> cheese
pasilla -> pepper
peacan -> nut
peanut -> nut
pecorino -> cheese
pecorinoromano -> cheese
penne -> pasta
pepperjack -> cheese
perciatelli -> pasta
pickerel -> fish
pilchards -> fish
pinquito -> bean
pinto -> bean
piquillo -> pepper
piquin -> pepper
pisco -> alcohol
pistolette -> bread
pleurotus -> mushroom
poblano -> pepper
poitin -> alcohol
pollock -> fish
pompano -> fish
porcini -> mushroom
port -> alcohol
porter -> alcohol
porterhouse -> meat
portobello -> mushroom
prosecco -> alcohol
provolone -> cheese
pumpernickel -> bread
queijo -> cheese
queso -> cheese
raclette -> cheese
radiatore -> pasta
raki -> alcohol
ravioli -> pasta
reblochon -> cheese
redfish -> fish
regato -> cheese
reggiano -> cheese
retsina -> alcohol
ribeye -> meat
ricebread -> bread
ricotta -> cheese
riesling -> alcohol
rigate -> pasta
rigatoni -> pasta
rioja -> alcohol
ripasso -> alcohol
riserva -> alcohol
rockfish -> fish
rocoto -> pepper
roma -> tomato
romaine -> lettuce
romano -> cheese
roquefort -> cheese
rosÃ© -> alcohol
rotelle -> pasta
rotini -> pasta
rum -> alcohol
rumchata -> alcohol
russet -> potato
russett -> potato
rye -> bread
sake -> alcohol
salmon -> fish
sancerre -> alcohol
sangiovese -> alcohol
sangrita -> alcohol
satsuma -> orange
sauterne -> alcohol
sauvignon -> alcohol
savoy -> cabbage
scamorza -> cheese
schnapps -> alcohol
scotch -> alcohol
semolina -> flour
serrano -> pepper
seville -> orange
shaohsing -> alcohol
sharpcheddar -> cheese
sheepshead -> fish
sherry -> alcohol
shiitake -> mushroom
shimeji -> mushroom
shiraz -> fruit
sirloin -> meat
slaw -> coleslaw
smirnoff -> alcohol
snapper -> fish
snapper -> snapper
sockeye -> fish
soju -> alcohol
sole -> fish
somen -> noodle
sottocenere -> cheese
sourdough -> bread
spaghetti -> pasta
spaghettini -> pasta
spareribs -> meat
spumante -> alcohol
steak -> meat
steelhead -> fish
stella -> alcohol
stilton -> cheese
strawberry -> fruit
strozzapreti -> pasta
sultana -> fruit
sungold -> tomato
sweetarts -> candy
swiss -> cheese
swordfish -> fish
syrah -> grape
tagliatelle -> pasta
taglierini -> pasta
tai -> fish
taleggio -> cheese
tanqueray -> alcohol
tanqueray -> tanqueray
tasso -> meat
tater -> potato
tbone -> meat
tempranillo -> alcohol
tenderloin -> meat
tequila -> alcohol
tilipia -> fish
topsirloin -> meat
tortellini -> pasta
tortiglioni -> pasta
trout -> fish
trumpet -> mushroom
tubetti -> pasta
tuna -> fish
turbot -> fish
velveeta -> cheese
verdelho -> grape
vermicelli -> pasta
vermouth -> alcohol
vidalia -> onion
walleye -> fish
whiskey -> alcohol
whitefish -> fish
whitewine -> alcohol
wine -> alcohol
winesap -> apple
yellowfin -> fish
yolk -> egg
yolks -> egg
yukon -> potato
yukongold -> potato
zapallo -> pumpkin
zinfandel -> alcohol
ziti -> pasta
